Add email handler guide (#2072)
sensu/sensu-docs: content/sensu-go/5.17/guides/email-handler.md

---
title: "Send email alerts with the Sensu Go Email Handler"
linkTitle: "Send Email Alerts"
description: "Here’s how to send alerts to your email with the Sensu Go Email Handler. Use handlers to send events to your technology of choice (in this case, email) to alert you of incidents and help you resolve them more quickly."
weight: 85
version: "5.17"
product: "Sensu Go"
platformContent: False
menu: 
  sensu-go-5.17:
    parent: guides
---

- [Create an ad hoc event](#create-an-ad-hoc-event)
- [Add the email handler asset](#add-the-email-handler-asset)
- [Add an event filter](#add-an-event-filter)
- [Assign the email handler to a check](#assign-the-email-handler-to-a-check)
- [Create an email template](#create-an-email-template)
- [Trigger an event](#trigger-an-event)
- [Next steps](#next-steps)

Sensu event handlers are actions the Sensu backend executes on [events][1].
This guide explains how to use the [Sensu Go Email Handler][3] to send notification emails.

To follow this guide, you’ll need to [install the Sensu backend][12] and have at least one [Sensu agent][13] running on Linux.
You should also [install and configure sensuctl][4].

> ## Create an ad hoc event

Reviewer: We don't need to create this event before we configure the handler. I think this section should be merged with the `Trigger an event` section.

Before you can send alerts to your email by configuring a handler, you need an [event][16] that generates the alerts.
When you are using Sensu in production, events will come from a check or metric you configure.
For this guide, you will create an ad hoc event that you can trigger manually.

_**NOTE**: Make sure you have [installed the Sensu backend][12], have at least one [Sensu agent][13] running, and have [installed and configured sensuctl][4]._

> To begin, set your environment variables to include your credentials using `sensuctl env`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin, use `sensuctl env` to set up environment variables, which will provide the required credentials for the Sensu API:
```

{{< highlight shell >}}
eval $(sensuctl env)
{{< /highlight >}}

> Now you can use the Sensu API to create an ad hoc monitoring event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify that the `SENSU_ACCESS_TOKEN` environment variable is set by echoing its value:

{{< highlight shell >}}
echo $SENSU_ACCESS_TOKEN
eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJleHAiOjE1NzkwMzY5NjQsImp0aSI6ImJiMmY0ODY4ZTJhZWEyMDhhMTExOTllMGZkNzkzMDc0Iiwic3ViIjoiYWRtaW4iLCJncm91cHMiOlsiY2x1c3Rlci1hZG1pbnMiLCJzeXN0ZW06dXNlcnMiXSwicHJvdmlkZXIiOnsicHJvdmlkZXJfaWQiOiJiYXNpYyIsInByb3ZpZGVyX3R5cGUiOiIiLCJ1c2VyX2lkIjoiYWRtaW4ifX0.6XmuvblCN743R2maF4yErS3K3sOVczsCBsjib9TenUU
{{< /highlight >}}

Now you can use the Sensu API to create an ad hoc monitoring event.
```

Then, replace the following text:

- `YOUR-SENDER@example.com`: Replace with the email address you want to use to send email alerts
- `YOUR-RECIPIENT@example.com`: Replace with the email address you want to receive email alerts
- `YOUR-SMTP-SERVER.example.com`: Replace with the hostname of your SMTP server
- `USERNAME`: Replace with your SMTP username, typically your email address
- `PASSWORD`: Replace with your SMTP password, typically the same as your email password

_**NOTE**: To use Gmail or G Suite as your SMTP server, follow Google's instructions for [sending email via SMTP][14]. If you have enabled 2-step verification on your Google account, you'll need to use an [app password][15] instead of your login password._

You probably noticed that the handler definition includes two other filters: [`is_incident`][10] and [`not_silenced`][11].
These two filters are included in every Sensu backend installation, so you don't have to create them.

After you add your email, server, username, and password values, run your updated code to create the email handler definition.

Now your handler and event filter are set up!
Next, assign the email handler to your `server-health` check.

> ## Assign the email handler to a check

Reviewer: I don't think this step is necessary, as the handler is being specified in our ad-hoc event payloads.

{{< /highlight >}}

_**NOTE**: If you see an `invalid credentials` error, refresh your token. Run `eval $(sensuctl env)`._

Check out your email — you should see a message from Sensu!

Create another event with status set to 0. Run:

{{< highlight shell >}}
curl -sS -X PUT \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $SENSU_ACCESS_TOKEN" \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-d '{
  "entity": {
    "entity_class": "proxy",
    "metadata": {
      "name": "server01",
      "namespace": "default"
    }
  },
  "check": {
    "metadata": {
      "name": "server-health"
    },
    "output": "Everything is OK.",
    "status": 0,
    "interval": 60,
    "handlers": ["email"]
  }
}' \
http://localhost:8080/api/core/v2/namespaces/default/events/server01/server-health | jq .
{{< /highlight >}}

You should receive another email because the event status changed to `0` (OK).

## Next steps

Now that you know how to apply a handler to a check and take action on events:

- Reuse this email handler with the `check-cpu` check in our [Monitor server resources][2] guide.
- Read the [handlers reference][6] for in-depth handler documentation.
- Check out the [Reduce alert fatigue][7] guide.

> You can also follow our [Up and running with Sensu Go][9] interactive tutorial to set up the Sensu Go email handler and test it with simulated `critical` events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also follow our [Up and running with Sensu Go][9] interactive tutorial to set up the Sensu Go email handler and test a similar workflow with the addition of a Sensu agent for producing events using scheduled checks.
```
